
## Quantitative Economic Modeling with Data Science Applications

- **Instructor:** Philip Solimine, philip.solimine@ubc.ca
- **TA:** Derek Caughy, dcaughy@student.ubc.ca
- **Textbook:** [QuantEcon DataScience](https://datascience.quantecon.org/)


## Course Overview
This is a course introducing the computational and data science tools used in modern economics.

We will explore the intersection of data science, economics, and programming, and learn how they can be used to understand the world around us. The course will focus on learning practical programming skills for the workplace and future studies in economics and finance, and is envisioned as a complement to econometrics. Unlike other courses in computer science, data science, or statistics, the emphasis of this course includes both the programming and the statistics necessary to analyze data and subsequently interpret results through the lens of economics.

This course is **not** recommended for students who already have significant experience with Python, or have taken courses like CPSC 103/107 or COMM 337.

The classes will be held at **LASR 104** from 5:00PM to 6:20PM.

## Course Materials and Communications

All materials will be provided online:
- Class Materials: https://github.com/doctor-phil/ECON323_2024_Spring
- Communications, Announcements, Grades: http://canvas.ubc.ca
- Piazza: https://piazza.com/ubc.ca/winterterm22023/econ323

## Grading

- Problem sets: 10%
- Midterm exam: 30%
- Final projects: 20%
- Final exam: 35%
- Participation: 5%

## Tentative Topics
- Note, the topics will not necessarily be covered in this order. See the [schedule](schedule.md)
1. **Python Fundamentals**
  * Introduction to Python
  * Basics
  * Collections
  * Control Flow
  * Functions
2. **Scientific Computing and Economics**
  * Introduction to Numpy Arrays
  * Introduction to Data Visualization in Python
  * Applied Linear Algebra
  * Randomness
  * Optimization
3. **Introduction to Pandas and Data Wrangling**
  * Introduction to Pandas
  * The basics
  * The index
  * Storage formats
  * Data cleaning
  * Reshaping
  * Merging
  * Groupby
  * Time series
  * Introductory Data Visualization

4. **Data Science Case Studies and Tools**

  * Regression
    * Linear Regression
    * Lasso Regression
    * Neural Networks
    * Random Forests
  * Classification
    * K-means
    * Classification Trees
    * Support Vector Machines
  * Data Visualization
    * Core visualization principles
    * Maps
  * Miscellaneous
    * Web scraping
    * Fitting probability distributions
    * Natural language processing

## Schedule

[Tentative schedule](schedule.md)

### Student Success:

UBC provides resources to support student learning and to maintain healthy lifestyles but recognizes that sometimes crises arise and so there are additional resources to access including those for survivors of sexual violence. UBC values respect for the person and ideas of all members of the academic community. Harassment and discrimination are not tolerated nor is suppression of academic freedom. UBC provides appropriate accommodation for students with disabilities and for religious, spiritual and cultural observances. UBC values academic honesty and students are expected to acknowledge the ideas generated by others and to uphold the highest academic standards in all of their actions. Details of the policies and how to access support are available here: https://senate.ubc.ca/policies-resources-support-student-success/.

### Policy on sharing course materials:

All the materials provided to you as part of this course are protected by copyright. All assignment instructions, quiz questions and answers, discussion questions, announcements, lecture slides, audio/video recordings, Canvas modules, and any other materials provided to you by your instructor or in the textbook are for use only by students enrolled in this course this term. Sharing any of these materials beyond this course, including by posting on file-sharing websites (e.g., CourseHero, Google Docs) is a violation of copyright law and an academic offence. Copying and pasting sentences from the lecture notes or the textbook (e.g., definitions) into for-profit software (e.g., Quizlet) is likewise a violation of copyright law, and an academic offence. Violations of this policy will be treated according to the provisos of the Code of Student Conduct. For further information about copyright law, please refer to (https://copyright.ubc.ca/students/).

### Policy on Academic Honesty:

It is the policy of the Vancouver School of Economics to report all violations of UBC’s standards for academic integrity to the office of the Dean of Arts. All violations of academic integrity standards will result in a grade of zero on the relevant assessment (exam, paper, assignment etc.).  Students who do not have a previous offence may have the option to enter into a diversionary process with the Dean of Arts to resolve their misconduct (https://academicintegrity.ubc.ca/diversionary-process/). Any student who has a previous academic offence will be referred to the President’s Advisory Committee on Student Discipline (PACSD) (https://universitycounsel.ubc.ca/homepage/guides-and-resources/discipline/). PACSD may impose additional penalties including: a transcript notation indicating that the student has committed an academic offence, zero in the course, and/or suspension or expulsion from the University. You are personally responsible for understanding and following the UBC’s policies for academic integrity: https://vancouver.calendar.ubc.ca/campus-wide-policies-and-regulations/academic-honesty-and-standards. A Canvas module has been made available you for this purpose titled “Avoiding Academic Misconduct”. It is your responsibility to read the materials in that module before submitting any work in this course. Speak to your instructor if you have any questions regarding the standard for academic integrity at UBC and/or the VSE polices on academic misconduct.

Some examples of behavior that constitute academic misconduct include but are not limited to:

   - Accessing any resources during an exam that have not been explicitly allowed by the instructor
   - Having your friend sign you in for attendance (or vice versa, signing in your friend who is absent)
   - Copying code directly from anyone who is not part of your homework or project group

### Acknowledgement of VSE Grading Policy:

Grading in this class will conform to VSE guidelines, which suggest a range of 72-78 average for 300-level courses.

### Policy on Academic Concessions:

There are only three acceptable grounds for academic concessions at UBC: unexpected changes in personal responsibilities that create a schedule conflict; medical circumstances; and compassionate grounds when the student experiences a traumatic event, sexual assault, or death in the family or of a close friend. Academic concessions for graded work and exams are granted for work that will be missed due to unexpected situations or circumstances. Situations that are expected (such as time constraints due to workload in other courses) or are predictable (such as being scheduled for paid work) are not grounds for academic concession.

Requests for academic concessions should be made before the due date for that graded work and/or the writing of the exam. UBC policy does not allow for concessions to students who have missed work because they have registered for a course after the due date for that work. You can read more about the rules for academic concessions here: https://students.ubc.ca/enrolment/academic-learning-resources/academic-concessions. Students in the Faculty of Arts who require a concession can apply for concessions using this form here: https://students.air.arts.ubc.ca/academic-concession-form/. Students in other Faculties should consult their faculty website on academic concessions. Please note that the role of the faculty advising office is to review the evidence and to either support or not support concession requests. The final decision to grant the request always rests with your instructor.

### Policy on the Use of AI Learning Tools:

The specific rules for the use of AI tools are at the discretion of the course instructor. Those rules might change over the course of the term as new technologies become available. Changes to those rules might change the content of assessments and the way that your work is evaluated. If no written instructions on the use of AI tools have been provided by the instructor, the use of all AI tools is strictly prohibited in the course. Where the written instructions permit the use of AI tools, that usage must be documented and attributed within your assessment(s). Students are responsible for all factual inaccuracies that are created by the use of AI tools. Please speak to your instructor if you have further questions about the ways in which AI technology use is permitted in this course.

### VSE Policy Prohibiting the Hiring of Tutors: 

The Vancouver School of Economics expressly prohibits any student from hiring a tutor and/or editor to assist with any portion of written work or academic research. If at any point you feel in need of additional writing support, please speak with your instructor and/or arrange for a writing consultation with UBC’s Centre for Writing and Scholarly Communication (https://writing.library.ubc.ca/). Additionally, you have access to research support through the UBC Library:  https://guides.library.ubc.ca/econ and https://guides.library.ubc.ca/econ490.

Any student who hires a tutor and/or editor to assist with any portion of written work or academic research will be given a zero on that component of the course and will be reported to the Dean’s office for academic misconduct (please see Policy on Academic Honesty).
